A. The giving of the first gifts.
1. (1-3) Six carts and twelve oxen offered at the conclusion of the building of the tabernacle.
Now it came to pass, when Moses had finished setting up the tabernacle, that he anointed it and consecrated it and all its furnishings, and the altar and all its utensils; so he anointed them and consecrated them. Then the leaders of Israel, the heads of their fathers’ houses, who were the leaders of the tribes and over those who were numbered, made an offering. And they brought their offering before the LORD, six covered carts and twelve oxen, a cart for every two of the leaders, and for each one an ox; and they presented them before the tabernacle.
a. When Moses had finished setting up the tabernacle: The material in Exodus, Leviticus, and Numbers regarding Israel in the wilderness is presented more according to theme than according to strict chronology. The tribal donations to the tabernacle took place after Exodus 40, and during the period of the priest’s ordination described in Leviticus 8-9. These 12 days began when the tabernacle was completed.
i. “The transactions mentioned in this chapter took place on the second day of the second month of the second year after their departure from Egypt; and the proper place of this account is immediately after the tenth chapter of Leviticus.” (Clarke)
b. And they brought their offering before the LORD: The leaders of each tribe bring a total of six carts (a cart for every two of the leaders) and twelve oxen (each one an ox), given to transport the tabernacle through the wilderness.
c. Six covered carts and twelve oxen: At this time, such carts were a great luxury – and no doubt, a significant offering from the tribes.
i. “The Hebrew word for ‘cart’ (agalah) is modified by the noun sab (‘litter’), used only here and in Isaiah 66:20. This phrase has traditionally been understood to describe a covered wagon, though the precise meaning of the wording is debated. Covered wagons would certainly be appropriate for transporting the sacred items.” (Allen)
2. (4-9) The distribution of the carts and oxen.
Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, “Accept these from them, that they may be used in doing the work of the tabernacle of meeting; and you shall give them to the Levites, to every man according to his service.” So Moses took the carts and the oxen, and gave them to the Levites. Two carts and four oxen he gave to the sons of Gershon, according to their service; and four carts and eight oxen he gave to the sons of Merari, according to their service, under the authority of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest. But to the sons of Kohath he gave none, because theirs was the service of the holy things, which they carried on their shoulders.
a. Two carts and four oxen he gave to the sons of Gershon: The family of Gershon received two carts with their four oxen; they had the responsibility of transporting the fabrics of the tabernacle (Numbers 4:25-26).
b. Four carts and eight oxen he gave to the sons of Merari: The family of Merari received four carts with their eight oxen; they had the job of transporting the boards and pillars of the tabernacle (Numbers 4:31-32).
i. “Double the number of what the Gershonites had, because their carriage was heavier; God proportions the burden to the back.” (Trapp)
c. But to the sons of Kohath he gave none: The family of Kohath received no carts, and no oxen; they were to carry the holy furniture of the tabernacle (Numbers 4:15) and were to carry all things on their shoulders – so, to remove any temptation to disobey, Moses gave them no carts.
B. The second giving of gifts.
1. (10-11) Twelve leaders of the twelve tribes to bring dedication gifts to the tabernacle, one on each day for twelve days.
Now the leaders offered the dedication offering for the altar when it was anointed; so the leaders offered their offering before the altar. For the LORD said to Moses, “They shall offer their offering, one leader each day, for the dedication of the altar.”
a. The leaders offered the dedication offering: Following are identical descriptions of each tribe offering specific items for the use of the tabernacle. They each offered a silver platter and a silver bowl (each holding a grain offering), and a gold pan holding incense. Along with these they were also to present one bull, ram, and a lamb as a burnt offering; a goat as a sin offering; along with two oxen and five rams, goats, and lambs as a peace offering.
i. “Peace-offerings are more numerous, because the princes and priests, and some of the people, did make a feast before the Lord out of them, and celebrated it with great rejoicing.” (Poole)
b. For the altar when it was anointed: This puts the presentation of the tribal gifts at the same time when the priests were consecrated in Leviticus 8-9.
i. “The altar was the focal point of daily worship, and it was therefore appropriate that when it was dedicated a representative from every tribe should offer all the regular sacrifices. It set a precedent and demonstrated that the worship was for every tribe and supported by every tribe.” (Wenham)
c. One leader each day: These identical offerings were offered over twelve days, with one day set aside for one of the tribes. To us, this may seem like meaningless repetition in this longest of all the chapters in Numbers. Nevertheless, God had several important reasons for this.
· To show that each tribe pledged their allegiance to Yahweh; that they each supported the work of the tabernacle and the priesthood, and the system of sacrifice commanded by God and carried out by the priests.
· To show the importance of each individual tribe, giving each tribe its own day of celebration and attention. These tribes were all related, but different – and each of them was important to God and should be regarded as important among Israel as a whole. Each tribe would receive attention, like each graduate at a commencement ceremony.
· To show the importance of each individual gift, giving full attention to every tribe’s gift. Every gift mattered.
· To show that God wanted to be approached with some degree of organization and order. The tribes came in a specific order, the same order that they were organized for marching through the wilderness.
· To show that at God’s altar, every tribe came as an equal. No tribe was better than the others at the altar for atonement, dedication unto God, and fellowship with the LORD.
i. “While all the story might have been told in a very few sentences, it is set forth with elaborate attention to detail. Every man is named and every gift is recorded. Thus, while the whole reveals unity of purpose and of equality of giving, in the divine recognition there is a remarkable attention to individual devotion.” (Morgan)
ii. The repetition of these offerings over twelve days gave a sense of ritual and ceremony to the participation of the tribes at the tabernacle. Ceremony and ritual have some place among the people of God. Different parts of the broader Christian family may debate the degree of emphasis on the role of ceremony and ritual, but it is undeniable that there is some place for ritual and ceremony in the gatherings of God’s people.
2. (12-88) The giving of the dedication offerings over twelve days.
And the one who offered his offering on the first day was Nahshon the son of Amminadab, from the tribe of Judah. His offering was one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense; one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, as a burnt offering; one kid of the goats as a sin offering; and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
On the second day Nethanel the son of Zuar, leader of Issachar, presented an offering. For his offering he offered one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense; one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, as a burnt offering; one kid of the goats as a sin offering; and as the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Nethanel the son of Zuar. 
On the third day Eliab the son of Helon, leader of the children of Zebulun, presented an offering. His offering was one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense; one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, as a burnt offering; one kid of the goats as a sin offering; and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Eliab the son of Helon.
On the fourth day Elizur the son of Shedeur, leader of the children of Reuben, presented an offering. His offering was one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense; one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, as a burnt offering; one kid of the goats as a sin offering; and as the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Elizur the son of Shedeur.
On the fifth day Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai, leader of the children of Simeon, presented an offering. His offering was one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense; one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, as a burnt offering; one kid of the goats as a sin offering; and as the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
On the sixth day Eliasaph the son of Deuel, leader of the children of Gad, presented an offering. His offering was one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense; one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, as a burnt offering; one kid of the goats as a sin offering; and as the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Eliasaph the son of Deuel.
On the seventh day Elishama the son of Ammihud, leader of the children of Ephraim, presented an offering. His offering was one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense; one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, as a burnt offering; one kid of the goats as a sin offering; and as the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Elishama the son of Ammihud.
On the eighth day Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur, leader of the children of Manasseh, presented an offering. His offering was one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense; one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, as a burnt offering; one kid of the goats as a sin offering; and as the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
On the ninth day Abidan the son of Gideoni, leader of the children of Benjamin, presented an offering. His offering was one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense; one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, as a burnt offering; one kid of the goats as a sin offering; and as the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Abidan the son of Gideoni.
On the tenth day Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai, leader of the children of Dan, presented an offering. His offering was one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense; one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, as a burnt offering; one kid of the goats as a sin offering; and as the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
On the eleventh day Pagiel the son of Ocran, leader of the children of Asher, presented an offering. His offering was one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense; one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, as a burnt offering; one kid of the goats as a sin offering; and as the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Pagiel the son of Ocran.
On the twelfth day Ahira the son of Enan, leader of the children of Naphtali, presented an offering. His offering was one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense; one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, as a burnt offering; one kid of the goats as a sin offering; and as the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Ahira the son of Enan.
This was the dedication offering for the altar from the leaders of Israel, when it was anointed: twelve silver platters, twelve silver bowls, and twelve gold pans. Each silver platter weighed one hundred and thirty shekels and each bowl seventy shekels. All the silver of the vessels weighed two thousand four hundred shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary. The twelve gold pans full of incense weighed ten shekels apiece, according to the shekel of the sanctuary; all the gold of the pans weighed one hundred and twenty shekels. All the oxen for the burnt offering were twelve young bulls, the rams twelve, the male lambs in their first year twelve, with their grain offering, and the kids of the goats as a sin offering twelve. And all the oxen for the sacrifice of peace offerings were twenty-four bulls, the rams sixty, the male goats sixty, and the lambs in their first year sixty. This was the dedication offering for the altar after it was anointed.
a. His offering was one silver platter: Each leader brought a silver platter and a silver bowl, each full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; a gold pan with incense, a bull, a ram, a male lamb, a young goat, two oxen, five rams, five adult goats, and five more lambs.
i. Each silver plate weighed about three pounds, each silver bowl about two pounds, and a gold shovel about four ounces. “The term shekel was used throughout the Levant and Mesopotamia as a standard weight measure, generally ranging from ten to thirteen grams.” (Cole)
ii. Clearly, this was generous giving. God must show Promised Land people how to be givers – one of the best measures of one who has moved from a slave mind-set to a Promised Land mind-set. The slave by nature is a taker because he is often unsure of provision. Promised land people are generous, because they trust in a God who promised to meet all their needs.
b. His offering was one silver platter: Each tribal leader brought exactly the same offering over the twelve days.
i. Clearly, this was humble giving. By requiring the same gift from every tribe, God made sure that no tribe or tribal leader glorified himself through his giving. We must resist the tendency to give in order to be seen of men. Promised land people care about God’s glory, not their own.
ii. “In each case the giving was equal, thus precluding the possibility of any spirit of rivalry and realizing unity of purpose.” (Morgan)
c. This was the dedication offering for the altar from the leaders of Israel: Each offering was recorded the same – seemingly, “wasting” space in the Scriptures. God’s purpose was to draw attention to each tribe’s offering, though they were all the same.
i. Godly giving is always noticed by God, even if it is the same or less than many other gifts. God sees and “records” every gift given in a right heart, even if it is only worth two mites (Mark 12:42-44). Every gift from a promised-land kind of heart is noticed by God.
3. (89) Moses meets with God and hears His voice.
Now when Moses went into the tabernacle of meeting to speak with Him, he heard the voice of One speaking to him from above the mercy seat that was on the ark of the Testimony, from between the two cherubim; thus He spoke to him.
a. Moses went into the tabernacle of meeting: Promised land people need leadership, and they need leadership that hears from God and knows His voice.
b. He heard the voice of One speaking to him: We rarely read in the Bible of exactly how God spoke to Moses. Here, at the tabernacle, we see that it was in an audible voice, not merely an impression in the mind.
i. “This is perhaps the one instance in which we have a clear statement that in communing with God, Moses did actually hear a voice. The communications which he received were more than subjective impressions; they were objective expressions.” (Morgan)
ii. “There is no form or visible manifestation, no angel or being in human likeness, representing God. It is only a Voice that is heard.” (Watson)
iii. “Though Moses saw no similitude, but only heard a voice, yet he had the fullest proof of the presence as well as of the being of the Almighty. In this way God chose to manifest himself during that dispensation, till the fulness of the time came, in which the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us.” (Clarke)
© 2022 The Enduring Word Bible Commentary by David Guzik – ewm@enduringword.com
TweetPin1Share23 Shares 


 