A. The duty of the Kohathites.
1. (1-3) Those fit for service.
Then the LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying: “Take a census of the sons of Kohath from among the children of Levi, by their families, by their fathers’ house, from thirty years old and above, even to fifty years old, all who enter the service to do the work in the tabernacle of meeting.”
a. Take a census of the sons of Kohath: A general count of the men of the family of Kohath was recorded in Numbers 3:27-28. There were found to be 8,600 males among the sons of Kohath. This second count was required to see the number of the sons of Kohath who were of age to serve the tabernacle.
i. When the sons of Levi are mentioned in Numbers 3:17, their order is Gershon, Kohath, and Merari – this was presumably their birth order. However, in Numbers 4 Kohath is dealt with before Gershon and is given a (seemingly) more prestigious duty: the transport of the most holy furnishings of the tabernacle.
ii. “The reason for this elevation of the second son over his older brother seems to be based on the sovereign selection of the Lord and the favored work he gives this family in proximity to the holiest things.” (Allen)
iii. God elevates the unexpected. In the culture of the Old Testament, an elder son was always favored over a younger son. It is not always so with God. In His unfolding plan, God favored Isaac over Ishmael, Jacob over Esau, Joseph over Reuben, Moses over Aaron, and David over his brothers. God does not always go against the culture’s expectation of whom to favor by their birth, but He often does.
b. From thirty years old and above, even to fifty years old: Among the males of the family of Kohath, only those between the ages of thirty and fifty were allowed to do the work in the tabernacle of meeting.
i. In some ways, the years between 30 and 50 were thought to be the “prime” of a man’s life (combining both wisdom and physical strength). When it came to the work in the tabernacle of meeting, God wanted the best from the family of Kohath.
ii. Numbers 8:24 says that the Levites entered their service at 25 years of age. According to some sources, the years between 25 and 30 were used for training. “The rabbins say that the Levites began to learn to do the service at twenty-five, and that having been instructed five years, they began the public service at thirty.” (Clarke)
iii. Adam Clarke thought that this, in principle, pointed to a retirement age for pastors and ministers: “A preacher who devotes his whole time and strength to the service of the Church of God from twenty to fifty or sixty years of age, should be then excused from his severer labour, and maintained at the charge of the sanctuary. This would not only be a great comfort to a worn-out servant of God but also of great use to the work of the ministry, which, to be faithfully and effectually performed, requires all the powers of the body and mind of man. Old faithful ministers are to be highly respected for their work’s sake, and to be supplied with all the necessaries and comforts of life; but how little can they do in the public ministry of the word, however willing to work, when their eye waxes dim and their bodily strength fails!”
2. (4-14) The work of packing the furniture and utensils of the tabernacle.
“This is the service of the sons of Kohath in the tabernacle of meeting, relating to the most holy things: When the camp prepares to journey, Aaron and his sons shall come, and they shall take down the covering veil and cover the ark of the Testimony with it. Then they shall put on it a covering of badger skins, and spread over that a cloth entirely of blue; and they shall insert its poles.
“On the table of showbread they shall spread a blue cloth, and put on it the dishes, the pans, the bowls, and the pitchers for pouring; and the showbread shall be on it. They shall spread over them a scarlet cloth, and cover the same with a covering of badger skins; and they shall insert its poles. And they shall take a blue cloth and cover the lampstand of the light, with its lamps, its wick-trimmers, its trays, and all its oil vessels, with which they service it. Then they shall put it with all its utensils in a covering of badger skins, and put it on a carrying beam.
“Over the golden altar they shall spread a blue cloth, and cover it with a covering of badger skins; and they shall insert its poles. Then they shall take all the utensils of service with which they minister in the sanctuary, put them in a blue cloth, cover them with a covering of badger skins, and put them on a carrying beam. Also they shall take away the ashes from the altar, and spread a purple cloth over it. They shall put on it all its implements with which they minister there; the firepans, the forks, the shovels, the basins, and all the utensils of the altar; and they shall spread on it a covering of badger skins, and insert its poles.
a. This is the service of the sons of Kohath: This section (Numbers 4:4-14) describes what the priests (Aaron and his sons) had to do before the sons of Kohath could do their work.
b. When the camp prepares to journey: The tabernacle of meeting was a portable temple or house of God. Because Israel journeyed through the wilderness on their way to the land of Canaan, they needed a temple or house of God that could move with them. The tabernacle of meeting was a temple in a tent. The various pieces of furniture had to be properly packed for moving.
i. “He who counts the stars and calls them all by their names, leaves nothing unarranged in his own service.” (Spurgeon)
c. They shall take down the covering veil and cover the ark of the Testimony with it: The ark of the covenant was holy, so it could only be covered and prepared for transport by the priests. The priests first covered it with the veil that separated the holy place from the most holy place, then they covered the veil with badger skins and finally with a cloth entirely of blue.
i. They shall insert its poles: The ark of the covenant was not supposed to be directly touched by human hands. It had rings on the side, through which poles were inserted. The ark was carried by these poles (Exodus 25:12-14). This method of carrying with rings and poles was also used for the table of showbread (Exodus 25:26-28), the altar of burnt offering (Exodus 27:6-7), and the altar of incense (Exodus 30:4-5).
ii. “All the preparation suggests a rigorous training schedule before actual work would be done by a given priest.” (Allen)
d. The table of showbread: This, along with its associated utensils (dishes, pans, bowls, pitchers for pouring), was covered first with a scarlet cloth, then with a covering of badger skins.
e. The lampstand of the light: This, along with its associated utensils (lamps, wick-trimmers, trays, oil vessels), was covered with a blue cloth, then with a covering of badger skins.
f. The golden altar: This (also known as the altar of incense), along with its utensils of service, was covered in a blue cloth, then with a covering of badger skins. The ashes from the altar were collected on a purple cloth, together with other implements associated with the altar of incense, and then covered with badger skins.
i. “The Samaritan Pentateuch and the Septuagint add the bronze laver at the conclusion of verse 14 that is missing from the MT [Hebrew text].” (Cole)
3. (15-20) The moving of the furniture and utensils of the tabernacle.
And when Aaron and his sons have finished covering the sanctuary and all the furnishings of the sanctuary, when the camp is set to go, then the sons of Kohath shall come to carry them; but they shall not touch any holy thing, lest they die. 
“These are the things in the tabernacle of meeting which the sons of Kohath are to carry. 
“The appointed duty of Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest is the oil for the light, the sweet incense, the daily grain offering, the anointing oil, the oversight of all the tabernacle, of all that is in it, with the sanctuary and its furnishings.” 
Then the LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying: “Do not cut off the tribe of the families of the Kohathites from among the Levites; but do this in regard to them, that they may live and not die when they approach the most holy things: Aaron and his sons shall go in and appoint each of them to his service and his task. But they shall not go in to watch while the holy things are being covered, lest they die.”
a. When the camp is set to go, then the sons of Kohath shall come to carry them; but they shall not touch any holy thing, lest they die: The Kohathites were forbidden to touch any of the tabernacle furniture. Only the priests could prepare the furnishings of the sanctuary; the sons of Kohath were commanded to carry them.
b. The appointed duty of Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest: Apparently, these were aspects of the priestly work that were under the supervision of Eleazar the son of Aaron. Numbers 4:16 is an interesting summary of many of the duties of the priests.
· The oil for the light: The priests supplied oil for the lampstands and kept the lamps burning.
· The sweet incense: The priests prepared and burned the incense for the altar of incense.
· The daily grain offering: The priests brought a daily offering to the altar of burnt offering.
· The anointing oil: The priests kept and applied the holy anointing oil, used to anoint rulers and priests and others designated by God.
· The oversight of all the tabernacle, of all that is in it, with the sanctuary and its furnishings: The priests were responsible for everything at the tabernacle in general. The tabernacle (the house of God) was not under the authority of the civil leaders of Israel (kings, magistrates, elders, priests). It was supervised by the priests of Israel.
c. Aaron and his sons shall go in and appoint each of them to his service and his task: The Kohathites had a permanent place of service before the LORD and for Israel. They were to be specially appointed as individuals (appoint each of them to his service) for their work. Even though their work was “only” transporting the furnishings of the tabernacle, it was properly regarded as important, worthy service unto God, deserving of a specific appointment.
d. Lest they die: The Kohathites were not to even look at the holy things as the priests covered them and prepared them for moving. They had a specific role to fulfill in their work for the LORD and were not to go beyond that role. The penalty for going beyond what God had appointed could be death.
B. The duty of the Gershonites.
1. (21-23) Those of the sons of Gershon fit for service.
Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying: “Also take a census of the sons of Gershon, by their fathers’ house, by their families. From thirty years old and above, even to fifty years old, you shall number them, all who enter to perform the service, to do the work in the tabernacle of meeting.
a. Take a census of the sons of Gershon: A general count of the men of the family of Gershon was recorded in Numbers 3:21-22. There were found to be 7,500 males among the sons of Gershon. This second count was required to see the number of the sons of Gershon who were of age to serve the tabernacle.
b. From thirty years old and above, even to fifty years old: As with the Kohathites, they were to count only those between the ages of thirty and fifty were allowed to do the work in the tabernacle of meeting. When it came to the work in the tabernacle of meeting, God wanted the best combination of wisdom and strength from the family of Gershon.
i. All who enter to perform the service: “The words ‘to perform the service’ are, as the margin tells us, literally, to ‘war the warfare.’” (Maclaren)
ii. The hint of warfare in this phrase in this context is meaningful. The service of these Levites was relatively mundane. They did not perform sacrifice and were not even allowed to look at the sacred furnishings of the tabernacle. Yet, their service was described in some sense as warfare. This speaks to a truth that many servants of God have known: when one begins to serve the Lord, His people, and a needy world in the name of Jesus, the warfare begins.
2. (24-28) The duties of the Gershonites.
This is the service of the families of the Gershonites, in serving and carrying: They shall carry the curtains of the tabernacle and the tabernacle of meeting with its covering, the covering of badger skins that is on it, the screen for the door of the tabernacle of meeting, the screen for the door of the gate of the court, the hangings of the court which are around the tabernacle and altar, and their cords, all the furnishings for their service and all that is made for these things: so shall they serve. 
“Aaron and his sons shall assign all the service of the sons of the Gershonites, all their tasks and all their service. And you shall appoint to them all their tasks as their duty. This is the service of the families of the sons of Gershon in the tabernacle of meeting. And their duties shall be under the authority of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.”
a. This is the service of the families of the Gershonites: While the Kohathites were responsible for carrying the furnishings of the tabernacle, the Gershonites were responsible for carrying the tabernacle coverings. This included the various curtains, hangings, cords, and all the furnishings associated with the “walls” of the tabernacle.
i. The covering of badger skins: This is rendered differently in some translations. The Revised Standard Version has “goatskin.” The New English Bible has “porpoise-hide.” “The Hebrew word rendered ‘sea cow’ (taḥas) is similar to the Arabic term for the dolphin; hence, porpoise-hide or hide of sea cows seems correct.” (Allen)
b. Aaron and his sons shall assign all the service of the sons of Gershon: As with the Kohathites, the work of the Gershonites was under the supervision of the priests (Aaron and his sons). Here, it was under the authority of Ithmar, one of the sons of Aaron.
C. The duty of the family of Merari.
1. (29-30) Those fit for service.
“As for the sons of Merari, you shall number them by their families and by their fathers’ house. From thirty years old and above, even to fifty years old, you shall number them, everyone who enters the service to do the work of the tabernacle of meeting.
a. As for the sons of Merari, you shall number them:A general count of the men of the family of Merari was recorded in Numbers 3:33-34. There were found to be 6,200 males among the sons of Merari.
b. Who enters the service to do the work of the tabernacle: This second count was required to see the number of the sons of Merari who were of age to serve the tabernacle – those men from 30 to 50 years old.
i. To do the work of the tabernacle: “The work of the ministry is not an idle man’s occupation.” (Trapp)
2. (31-33) The duties of the family of Merari.
And this is what they must carry as all their service for the tabernacle of meeting: the boards of the tabernacle, its bars, its pillars, its sockets, and the pillars around the court with their sockets, pegs, and cords, with all their furnishings and all their service; and you shall assign to each man by name the items he must carry. This is the service of the families of the sons of Merari, as all their service for the tabernacle of meeting, under the authority of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.”
a. This is what they must carry as all their service for the tabernacle of meeting: Those of the family of Merari were called to pack and transport the boards, pillars, and associated parts of the frame and structure of the tabernacle. This was difficult and important work. These boards and pillars and other pieces were usually covered with precious metals, and the estimated weight of the tabernacle was some 19,000 pounds (more than 8,600 kilos).
b. You shall assign to each man by name the items he must carry: This was a highly organized work with each piece assigned to a specific man, under the authority of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest. The high level of organization shows the importance of the work, leaving none of it up to chance or the mere preference of the workers.
i. Assign to each man by name: “Because their items were small and numerous, each Merarite was responsible for one particular item, so that none of them would be lost.” (Wenham)
ii. Sockets, pegs, and cords: These are humble, everyday things. Yet, “Their work was as important as that of any other family group; for without it the more desirable, prestigious work of the tabernacle could not be done. Hence the Merarites could take an interest even in the placing of a post, a peg, or a rope…because the worship of God could not proceed—nor could the camp move out—unless these people were doing their holy work.” (Allen)
D. Summary of the census of the Levites.
1. (34-48) The final count according to the families.
And Moses, Aaron, and the leaders of the congregation numbered the sons of the Kohathites by their families and by their fathers’ house, from thirty years old and above, even to fifty years old, everyone who entered the service for work in the tabernacle of meeting; and those who were numbered by their families were two thousand seven hundred and fifty. These were the ones who were numbered of the families of the Kohathites, all who might serve in the tabernacle of meeting, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the commandment of the LORD by the hand of Moses. 
And those who were numbered of the sons of Gershon, by their families and by their fathers’ house, from thirty years old and above, even to fifty years old, everyone who entered the service for work in the tabernacle of meeting; those who were numbered by their families, by their fathers’ house, were two thousand six hundred and thirty. These are the ones who were numbered of the families of the sons of Gershon, of all who might serve in the tabernacle of meeting, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the commandment of the LORD. 
Those of the families of the sons of Merari who were numbered, by their families, by their fathers’ house, from thirty years old and above, even to fifty years old, everyone who entered the service for work in the tabernacle of meeting; those who were numbered by their families were three thousand two hundred. These are the ones who were numbered of the families of the sons of Merari, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the word of the LORD by the hand of Moses. 
All who were numbered of the Levites, whom Moses, Aaron, and the leaders of Israel numbered, by their families and by their fathers’ houses, from thirty years old and above, even to fifty years old, everyone who came to do the work of service and the work of bearing burdens in the tabernacle of meeting; those who were numbered were eight thousand five hundred and eighty.
a. These were the ones who were numbered of the families of the Kohathites: Of the family of Kohath, there were 2,750 men between the ages of 30 and 50 who were found fit for the service of the tabernacle.
b. These were the ones who were numbered of the families of the sons of Gershon: Of the family of Gershon, there were 2,630 men between the ages of 30 and 50 who were found fit for the service of the tabernacle.
c. These were the ones who were numbered of the families of the sons of Merari: Of the family of Merari, there were 3,200 men between the ages of 30 and 50 who were found fit for the service of the tabernacle.
d. All who were numbered of the Levites: The total of those available to do the work of service and the work of bearing burdens in the tabernacle of meeting from the families of the Kohathites, the sons of Gershon, and the sons of Merari was 8,580.
2. (49) The organization and order of the Levites.
According to the commandment of the LORD they were numbered by the hand of Moses, each according to his service and according to his task; thus were they numbered by him, as the LORD commanded Moses.
a. According to the commandment of the LORD they were numbered: This census was commanded by God and had a definite purpose in His plan.
b. Each according to his service and according to his task: Each man from these three family divisions eligible to serve had a role to play in doing the work of the tabernacle. No one family could do all the work. God made them dependent on each other to do the work.
i. “It is worthy of note that these Levites, although they were all equally consecrated to God, had not all exactly the same work to perform. God is not the God of all uniformity. There is a wondrous unity of plan and design in all that he does, but there is also an equally marvelous variety.” (Spurgeon)
ii. Later, God would explain through the Apostle Paul that the church is to work like a body (1 Corinthians 12:12-31). Like a human body, the church has many parts, looking different, doing different jobs, and meeting different needs. Some parts are more visible, some less, but they are all essential – and all have the same DNA code.
iii. Much trouble is caused in the service of the LORD by those who desire a different calling than they have, or who are jealous of those who have a different calling, or by those who exalt one calling and abase another. Everyone has a place and a job, and all can set themselves to do it.
© 2022 The Enduring Word Bible Commentary by David Guzik – ewm@enduringword.com
TweetPin1Share1011 Shares 


 